Diana, what is this here?
These are boxes of crayons.
I don't know if you ever saw these, Nancy.
I thought it was stacked away in my studio.
But these are plain crayons and sort of the history of the evolution of the crayon.
The crayon, this could in itself be a whole interesting subject.
It's not the thing I've looked into.
But wax crayons started being made around 1900.
And then there's this whole evolution of
color systems for crayons and... So what do you have here, Diane?
What would you say you have here that we're looking at?
Right now?
Yeah, what's here in terms of crayons?
I haven't even looked at them since I brought them back.
In terms of numbers, what would you say you have here?
I don't know, but I'll tell you that when I've done it.
I mean, I'm literally bringing things down from the... I feel a little self-conscious about this because there's a lot...
I know very well that I have, and there's a lot that I sort of put in the attic, and I thought, someday it'll all go together.
But I've never counted how many these are.
But I would say we're looking at five plastic boxes filled with crayons, some of which might be as much as 90 or so years old.
Is that what you're saying?
Exactly.
In their original.
And the thing that's so interesting is, like, this is Prang Company.
Louis Prang, you know, that whole history.
And look at that.
pretty good condition.
You get all the chromolithographs in Boston, yeah.
Yeah.
And there are a huge number of drawing instruction books that are his that are here, which I'll show you when we get in.
So it's a very interdependent collection.
I mean, this is quite remarkable.
Is this the one I want to... You know the name Albert Munsell?
No.
Here, right down.
Yeah.
The Munsell color system, which was developed actually here in Boston, and these are Munsell crayons based on that color system, which was a whole theory that is different than... This is actually... That's M-U-N-S-E-L-L.
Munsell crayons, Boston Mass.
This looks very old.
This is probably from the beginning of the 20th century.
But the thing...
I love telling stories.
I, when Drone to Art came out, which I told you about, that's my first book, a man heard me interviewed on the radio, and he called me, I don't know if I ever told you, but I can't remember his name yet, he was quite elderly, he had been to art school at RISD when he was a young man, he was from Bedford, poor fellow who somehow got a scholarship
And one thing led to another, and he became a scientist and was on the Apollo mission.
And his claim was his education in Micell color system from when he was young became the NASA system for describing color, which is the standard description of color recording in space.
So that, I love that story.
I don't know if it's true or not, but he did tell it to me.
And I see these things as having histories that have influence far beyond what you first think, you know, of children with wax crayons.
These are much newer.
These are sort of from the time of my own childhood.
See, what happened...
I was doing this for a long time.
These are early Crayolas before the box looked like the box you know.
I just want to write down some of the names.
So is this the precursor to the modern age?
Crayola.
Yeah.
Where was the crayon invented?
Is that an American... I think so.
I think it was... Well, I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
what happens is you have a lot of things companies suddenly doing the same thing at the same time and so i don't know um who gets credited for it um how did these how does this come into the collection i mean okay that's what i that was the thought that i had lost um i had been teaching course at math art on the history of american art education i'd been going to flea markets to
get all kinds of stuff.
And in the process, one of my students, who was married to a bookseller up at Salem, told me that he cleaned out all the books and I could buy whatever was left.
And this woman, I am starting to feel as I go through all this again, that she really was a soulmate.
I mean, she is very much part of this collection.
Her name was Mabel Spofford.
She was the art director for the town of Gloucester, Mass., for the public schools.
And she really was, she saved all this.
I mean, I bought some of the crayons, but she saved the history of the actual sample materials that came to her when she... In a teaching position.
Yeah.
And did she keep them in this condition?
Because it seems to be in pretty spectacular condition.
Yeah, yeah.
So she knew she was preserving artifacts.
She, I think, was brilliant, yeah.
She... The more I look at this stuff, I think, what was this maiden lady doing up there in Foster Master?
mean she took every course i just found this morning she took a cartooning course and she didn't just take it to teach the kids how to do it she took it to learn how to be a cartoonist in the 20s so it's a very interesting um insight into a female aspiration because this woman had to be very ambitious to have thought about
Saved, taken, notes.
I have all that stuff over there.
A bunch of that stuff.
That is not going to the Huntington's.
That probably is going to Mass Art, Nancy.
That's what ESC teaches.
I'm not sure about the crayons yet.
They're not books.
How would you classify them?
Well, Huntington wants all of it.
That chair, folks?
Those are coloring books.
Hardbound coloring books.
And I called them the other day and I said, do you really want these coloring books?
And they said, absolutely.
And you know, it's very, I know what interests me about them, but knowing what they own, it's very odd to think about these things moving into that collection.
But what's happening is you ask about what the Huntington's going to do.
Some of it goes to seal all those books in there.
Oh, my goodness.
Wow.
Much of those books will go into the Huntington Library.
And then the museum, they've just built an American Art Museum there 15 years ago or so, I think.
And they have archival storage there for the 3D objects.
They have 3D objects as well.
And then these boxes and stuff.
There are a lot of things I will walk you through.
But they want it all.
No surprise.
Are they coming out to get it?
Are they sending someone?
The company that introduced me to them is doing the shipping and packing and shipping.
I see.
And that will happen on Thursday.
Oh my goodness.
I keep saying the house is going to be out there.
Who's handling this on the Huntington side?
Amy, oh yes.
Amy Meyer.
who is the American art curator.
Do you know her?
I don't.
She is the most high energy, bright soul.
So she's on the art museum side.
She is the curator on the museum side.
And then, I can't remember the name now, but there are a couple of staff people on the book side, in the library side.
The chief of rare books is very interested in this collection.
And then there's some...
You might know the name.
Yes.
He's apparently nuts about the manuals and the sort of social history and instructional materials.
I've never met him.
Nice man.
Yeah, that's what I've heard.
They have a wonderful chemistry there.
When we went out there, I was sort of sizing up where this should go.
And they had a meeting of about seven people.
all who had been primed about what this was, and all who had their own perspective on what they could do with it.
That's extraordinary.
Yeah.
So Diana, this mostly came from one woman out of... These crayon things are pretty much the Gloucester person.
That's great.
What a trove that is.
I really, I couldn't believe it when I said, can you imagine?
And she just was,
It was everything.
I mean, what did she think she was doing?
I mean, now I feel a very strong need to tell people about her because she's like my partner in this, you know.
Had you been collecting any of this?
Yeah, I had some.
This was one of my favorite materials when I was a kid.
And so I probably bought that.
For that reason.
Not at all.
No, I'm positive.
I could give you more light.
No, I could.
I could.
Before your other guests come, can I take pictures of you or some of these things?
I don't want to get in the way of it.
I'll just walk you quickly.
You can stay late.
Oh, thank you very much.
Hello.
In this collection of these
I don't want to get into talking about them too much because there are connections between things I'd like to make, but these are all drawing kits, slates that children would have drawn on, stencils.
In fact, it's interesting how many of these things have... Could you open this door just a tad so we can get out?
It swings.
It may swing like that.
How about if it came out just like that?
That's a great idea.
I'd like to get a picture of you in there, too, discussing it a little bit, if that's all right.
That's great.
Go ahead.
You can just continue talking.
I just saw this.
I reached for my favorite things.
These are like my toy collections.
And this is a funny little guy I don't know much about.
A little animated figure of metal.
It's okay, I'm just... Great, thanks.
Don't even think about it.
Something to drink.
Just cold or something?
No.
Okay.
It is very hot in there.
It's quite nice, actually.
It looks like...
yes it is i meant to mention that to you this house has in itself i mean i i flipped over this house because of this library but the house has a very interesting history um the wood carver who did the seashell over the door and all this stuff bill this house was built for
His daughter.
And you know the reading room?
It's called the Robin's Reading Room, and the Ellington Public Library.
Most exquisitely tired.
You know that?
I didn't know that.
Just by this guy.
I didn't realize that.
And there were all sorts of people connections.
There were some paintings that came with this house that were by Friends of New Cross who I wrote about.
Everything leads to everything else, you know?
These people who sold up the house.
Nothing.
Hi.
Welcome.
Diana, this room is really wonderful.
When I saw this, it took me one second to say we've got to have the house.
And the crazy thing is that the people who were selling it, as you will be going through this process yourself or are, you have such a wonderful house.
The people who were selling this house had lived in here like curators of the house, and they changed nothing.
We had to make some changes, but they were looking for people who would have a historical tie-in to this place and keep it that way.
And when I saw this,
I feel a little bit like a broken record.
What happened is that about a month ago, I became very aware of how
much I wanted people on the East Coast to know this collection before it left.
I have been quite secretive about it over the years, to do with my personality probably, and many things.
I just went to flea markets for years and bought these funny little things
And I taught, as you all know, I think, a course on the history of art education, which I basically have to put together.
But anyway, I would bring in these objects to show them to students, and I would make exercises based on them sometimes.
adding to it, and I lived in a much smaller house than this.
I just couldn't believe the other day I saw it.
Did you have all this stuff in that house?
Yeah, where was it?
I can hardly picture it anymore in that house.
But anyway, I decided that it was time for this collection to find a devoted patron.
and um i found that patron in the huntington and um i couldn't believe how much the people there seem to understand the potential of this collection and um so
Then, in order to get it ready to go, the books I had catalogued when I acquired them.
I had a rule that no book comes into the house that isn't catalogued immediately.
Good rule.
Very good rule.
And then I later hired someone to put it on a database.
But it's a very quirky catalog.
In fact, I'll show you.
Let's go in here.
The reason that it's quirky is...
oh good oh good that's right this it was the um this is the book i'm not going to go through this is misleadingly detailed in the beginning but the each pair each page is a book and in every case i wrote why i thought it was significant
which is an incredibly good exercise for a collector, because it makes you be explicit about what you're doing or what you see.
I mean, some of these things, these are now all in chronological order.
Of course, I didn't find them that way.
And so I would ask a lot of questions in the catalogs, too, as well as descriptions.
What was I going to say?
The collection consists of about 400 volumes of books.
I don't know how much ephemera, et cetera.
I'm in the process right now of cataloging.
I know the categories.
The categories are paint boxes, drawing workbooks, all behind you.
There are about 20 loose-leaf binders of...
very interesting categories i'll read you some oh i love this this is this is one of the minor ones but it interests the hell out of me and this was art instruction when the united states was at war yeah i mean what this is is a massive exposure to the issues of american cultural values um as it changed
depending on what the crises were in the country.
There's, I have never shown this before, but there's soldier handcraft published by the War Department in 1945.
There's rhetoric about what teaching art to children, you know, there are various, this is a very interesting category that
What is this?
I don't even remember.
These are school catalogs.
Everything from the National Academy, Museum of Fine Arts, Pennsylvania Museum, and then to places like the North Bennett Street School, which has a very important history.
School catalogs, pamphlets, in some cases, curriculum.
This is Andover's curriculum.
As I was putting all this together, I suddenly realized that there was someone I knew who had gone to Andover who became an architect.
And I called and I said, did you have this curriculum when you were young?
This is Andy Dean.
And he said he always wished they had.
But in this
vintage that I have up there catalog, his father's architectural firm actually was the subject of study.
I mean, the layers, the things that come, you know, you sort of wonder, you know, about the coincidences and how planful.
You know, in Andover they taught you about Hagia Sophia, the Parthenon, Williamsburg,
And that to me tells a whole lot.
Anyway, I'll read you a few topics.
These are 19th century painting books, which is a precursor to the coloring book, and all based on the development of chromolithography.
These are art materials catalogs, where you've got pencils, where you've got paints, where you've got brushes, and they're
beautifully, in many cases, beautifully illustrated.
This is summer art schools in the 20th century.
I was thinking that you guys could, I wish there was more time because there are all sorts of things that you might be able to connect to for the work you're doing.
I wish we'd done this sooner from that point of view.
This is just
I love the personal in one's research.
And this is 20th century drawing material.
And these were my two favorite things when I was a child.
This was copying from newspapers.
You wrote the stick and you could get the ink to come off the newspaper and you could sort of like collage with cartoons.
John Nagy.
Do you remember John Nagy?
I used to get up Sunday morning when my parents were still sleeping and turn on the TV and draw along with John Nagy.
And there's his book.
So this is really the 20th century end of the story.
I don't want to go through all of them, but I can read you the categories maybe later.
That might be helpful.
The books that are going to Huntington are those up there and then the ones, the two rows below.
And these are, and everything in the built-in itself, pretty much everything in the built-in, up to here.
And these are all in that annotated library, I would think, which will be given to different libraries, hopefully, so that people can access what's there.
And it's a teaching tool in itself to say how this all fits together.
What I'd like to say about these books that I found so interesting is how dependent all this material was on what would then be technology.
The growth of lithography and the mass production of images made it possible for art instruction to become an industry.
And it became a huge industry.
By the way, you know that little book you gave me from your father?
Yes.
It's in the collection, and it's going Johnson with his name on it.
Come over here, and I'll show you.
The other thing is, I may sound a little bit as if I'm a sort of folky, quirky person who just put all this together, but I had some very great help.
One of the helps
with this book, written by Peter Marzio.
This was actually his dissertation and then published at the Bicentennial.
And this is a review of publications between 1820 and 1860 on art education in the United States.
And I had a rather stunning insight in looking at this recently,
He has an annotated bibliography in the back saying what's in the Library of Congress and what's in the American Antiquarium, blah, blah, blah, and all these different collections.
And I put next to it how many of them are here.
Did I send you that?
No.
And it just, it stunned me.
Part is that I was really prepared for this in my life, but the other thing is that New England has been so incredible in what you could go out on a Sunday morning and find something that's in, you know, the Library of Congress.
And this, I mean, this is just to show you, you have to really sit down with it, but these are the ones that I found and
It's a wonderful catalog.
And many times he says, these are things I heard of, that I knew existed by someone's referring to them, but I've never seen them, and some of those things are right here.
So, what I wanted to show you is some beautiful lithographies, because I see this whole field as growing from that.
Oh, I should tell you something else.
Almost everything...
is from New England flea market.
Almost everything is American printed.
It goes far, probably I have nothing for the South and Philadelphia.
And Boston, it's really big.
And then there's some Ohio stuff, as the West of Illinois.
Cincinnati became a very big art education center.
But anyway, so what I did was set up, in addition to this cataloging rule, I set up the rule of keeping it local and not traveling around, looking, by things published in the other parts of the country, but I don't think I would have found anything anyway.
So that's just to place it.
I sent it in New England.
I did buy some European things because I found them here.
And it seemed a very limiting cutoff point to not get those things.
And I'll show you some of those too.
But let me, this is one of the great treasures to my mind.
It's called the United States Drawing Book.
it's um i mean at this point i looked at the price here it was twenty dollars this is some of the most and that's high for what i paid for things but what's the year on it i'll tell you a second i think it's 1830 something 1838
J.T.
Bowen is the artist, and if you could come, I mean, this is just such knockout gorgeousness.
I mean, in the end, I just can't get over the quality of this.
And this is lithography, and these are sort of, yeah, this is all original lithographic plates.
And the quality, I mean, there's not even any foxing in this.
Or on these plates I'm looking at right now.
But the variation in value, the control of the mark, would have inspired anyone to be an artist.
And that's how I see it.
They have never, most people have never seen other than engraved images.
And suddenly here is the mark that looks like the mark the human hand makes.
And this is...
And this was a major industry.
Let me... I didn't answer.
Yeah.
General instructions in drawing the human figure, outline and shading.
You find all kinds of wonderful things in here.
I'm looking for... Look at the quality of that.
Where did you find that, Diana?
Is that a curiosity?
Yes, I did.
That's the other thing that's weird.
I remember almost everywhere.
I think I got this at Goodspeed.
Goods Thieves used to have treasures that were... Some days, here's the cover, the title says, 1839, the United States Drawing Book, Elements of the Art of Drawing with Lead Pencils, etc.
Anyway, this is one of my favorites.
And there are, many of these are lithographic studies.
These are really sweet.
This is by Benjamin Cole, who was the teacher of Frederick Church.
And... Oh, look at that.
These I bought up in Ipswich.
This is probably the single most copied image by students.
It was this bridge image.
Actually, it's sort of puzzling and interesting of what that meant.
But anyway, this paper is so wonderfully...
I think of it like baby skin.
It's so soft.
Oh, it is like cloth.
Doesn't it be beautiful to draw on that?
Yeah.
So these are Benjamin Coe things.
I'm trying to watch the time because I can go and go and go, and I don't want to wipe you all out.
I want to tell you.
Morton, if you think, I'm not going to worry about you.
There's enough chairs in here.
Everybody, when you get tired, sit down.
If not tired, fine.
So that side goes pretty much through the development of art education in Boston with Walter Smith and the stuff I wrote about in Drawn to Art.
Let me see.
I'm hopping to both sides.
Um, yeah, I wanted to show you this, Nick, just to make a connection.
The crayon books that we were, the crayons that we were looking at before, this is the Munsell color notation, if you want to look at it later.
Um, it's a little bit misleading because so many of the books are very large that they're not all in order over here, but anyway.
I want to point out this because I consider this my great treasures.
This is sort of like the Rosetta Stone that makes the whole rest of the collection hang together.
And it's amazingly not known.
You can still buy these pretty... I see them and in fact I had Mass Art buy one when I found a set not so long ago.
what these are are four volumes of the history of all art programming in the united states from yeah exactly uh published by the united states senate in the late 1880s and 1890s the story to be told from this collection is so different than what we know um the united states
government was convinced that art education was going to improve the balance of trade, it was going to make our products competitive with European products, and it was meticulous in these reports, in finding out what was happening in Toledo, Ohio, what was happening in Baltimore, and not only at the time of the publication, but retrospectively.
These are on terrible paper,
I'm really worried about these for the future.
They're practically like newspaper, and they just crumble when you look at them.
But it's very biased, it has the orientation to industry, but it's so rich, and you can read between the lines and find other things that were happening besides what they advocated.
what are they called they're called the senate documents um art and industry is i think the working title art and industry a four-part volume it's indexed in it's in the bibliography of grown to art um but anyway there is not a single image
in those four bodies, which is another reason that nobody would have paid any attention to them.
How did you discover it?
Well, I was teaching at MassArt and trying to learn more about Massachusetts' unique history within the whole art education field.
I don't know how I first found it.
I know MassArt didn't have one set, so I don't remember that.
I don't know.
But when you start for the first time, you must have realized it was something extraordinary.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
And the town-by-town thing is what's... You know, we are so much a people of generalizations now.
The schools are, the this is that, and these are all specific, detailed accounts of who the teachers were, how many students came, whether they were night courses or day courses.
And you learn so much from that.
In the Massachusetts drawing law that was passed in 1870 that required the towns offer free night and day classes for people who lived in towns with populations of over 10,000.
Now, I puzzled about that.
I thought, what is this 10,000 thing?
And I suddenly realized that was the way of having control
over what happened in the mills, because those big towns were the mill towns.
So they could control the curriculum to feed into the aesthetic of the manufacturing that was happening in those towns.
So the details, as any researcher knows, is the whole story.
Why do you think drawing was so important, then?
I mean, really, because we don't see it today.
Well, that's, of course, the thing.
The industrial economic advantage is the reason it was so appealing.
Secondarily, we were becoming more and more of an urban country, and art was sort of seen as high art.
And there was a lot of waffling between high art and industrial to appeal to different people's ambitions.
I have a wonderful little drawing book I'll show you for children called High Art for the Nursery.
High Art for the Nursery.
And what it is is on the cover are these birds high up in a tree.
I mean, you get a whole kind of melding of ideas.
I want to show you something else that's very interesting about this collection.
This is the exception to the rule.
Not so much, but these are the European things.
Oh.
Now, were these used for American schools?
Yeah.
Or American individuals.
This I'm going to show you.
This is a great treasure, probably the most expensive thing I bought.
And it really tested my theory of what am I doing this for and why should this be in this collection.
This is about 20 years old now, maybe 15 years.
But in my travels, I went to the area around Frederick Church's house, Hudson, New York, and all that stuff.
And there was a really nice bookshop there that I can't remember the name of right now.
But I found this treasure in it, and I had never seen a drawing book like this.
I do look at European drawing books, even though they don't mostly collect them.
And this just blew my mind, and I thought, somebody in this geographical area used this book.
And this was kind of an artist's picture.
Thomas Cole was on one side of the river.
So I will show you some of the most exquisite plates.
This is late 18th century perspective studies of hands.
I mean.
And it's such beautiful condition.
So, I leave this to somebody else to figure out what's the story.
It's a French book, and it was in a really sort of quite ordinary bookstore.
Beautiful quality.
And these perspective things.
Okay, so...
We could go on with that, but... Yeah, it really is.
It really is.
Will you tell us how much you paid for it?
Yeah, I think that book was way off the charts for me.
I think it's $250.
They didn't know that was important.
No, no.
Many, many, many of these things.
I'm looking to see if there actually is a price in here.
This was a generation of artist family, Jean Cousin.
Could you tell us the title, please?
L'art du dessin démontré d'une manière claire et précise.
G-U-S-S-I-M.
That's drawing.
Is there an author?
Jean Cousin.
C-O-U-S-I-M.
it was written in here at 1778 to 1821 and then i did a national union catalog search and found ancestors of this maker who did other books this is probably the hardest thing to find what's your best guess you said somebody used that i don't have i can't i do not see a connection
from the art that was made in that area and this, but its proximity just said, keep them together, keep it in the collection.
So, let's go sit at the table.
Did you price code things as you bought them too?
Sometimes.
Not as religiously as you cataloged them.
I may have, I can't really remember.
What I know I wanted to do and didn't do
was to price them as the catalogs came in, you know.
That just... I didn't know whether to believe them or not.
You can't do everything.
Exactly.
I think I did write down what I did.
What did you say the category over here was?
You said, these are the more modern.
And it goes up to here.
So there are things like Victor D'Amico, who is Museum of Modern Art, 30s art education.
John Dewey is in here.
There's a whole... How do you feel right now, three days before you part with this, showing this for what might be... Restless.
Restless.
Yeah.
I really... It's very, very strange.
And I feel like everybody around me is very understanding.
But it's like taking a big trip, you know, when you take a big trip and you think, can I get everything done?
And how does the new life and the old life fit?
I don't know.
And Diana, this was gathered over, what, you said a 30-year period?
25-ish, 25, I feel is probably more accurate.
I was saying 30, but I think...
Well, how are you doing?
You getting worn out?
Okay, let's go into the dining room.
You can hear her describe it, because I've heard I've collected all these years, you know, and I'm not an art person, but, oh, I found this great thing for $2.
I'm going to bring in one thing.
Oh, well, I do have a lot of these things.
The ephemeral thing.
When I was in the process of looking for new homes for this collection, I made a pen-page summary of what's here, and I will just read you the names
of the categories, so you get an idea.
And then I'm going to show you something.
This all makes me very sad.
It's sort of overwhelming.
This is probably a missed, it's probably more, but the categories, I'm just going to tell you.
There are color instruction kits, about ten of them.
pamphlets from art lectures, art teacher lectures.
I'm going to stop a minute because I just want to tell you something I meant to say before that I lost.
I forgot to tell you.
That I've decided is my big aha of the day.
And I was thinking, why is it that these things were so available and were so cheap?
It's not just isn't it fun to find a bargain.
It's a part of the social history of the objects that they were not valued.
And I think the history of American taste in art and certainly in art education has been to have a disdain for one's predecessor.
It's sort of an automatic disrespect.
So, you know, it was just incredible what one could find.
And it had no, I mean, you think of it, I'm not the greatest fan of the NEA, but you think about how we're dismantling one major cultural conduit.
And I see this as part of just, it doesn't matter.
You know, it's all sort of,
Those funny things people... History doesn't matter and art doesn't matter.
It's a double whammy.
That, you know, it's old stuff and we're on to new stuff and it's art and who cares about art anyway?
Well, thank God there are art museums and there are people that still care about collections.
And that's how I believe I was able to find so much, so...
relatively easily this stuff by the way is not around anymore every once in a while we well andy my partner in life uh um we he likes still to go to flea market and stuff and um
We don't see.
I mean, I'm not collecting anymore.
But I don't know what's going to happen, Nick, when this is all over emotionally.
I know a man who had a photo history museum.
Jack Naylor is his name, maybe some of you know him.
He had an extraordinary museum, and he sold it to Japan, and they made a museum in Japan of the history of American photography.
No sooner was it gone, then he started it all over again.
So, but I don't think the stuff is there anymore.
But anyway, let me give you the categories.
Color instruction, lecture, art lectures, drawing, models.
Those are like single lithographic plates.
Behind you, Ruth, are tons of
boxes from the 18th century.
I'm telling you, these were in the junk in the flea market.
So there are a lot of paint boxes over there, some very fine and some very, they were sort of like rewards of merit for little children in the 1890s.
The whole spread is there.
Art supply catalogs, glass slates.
Slates were a way children learned to draw.
They'd have wood engravings on one side of glass, and a set of wood engravings would come.
I'll show you that if I... I just want to give you the lay of the land, because I can't show you all this stuff.
Drawing cards, with the growth of lithography, was the production
of these things most people have not heard of it really is fun it's like um they are here's an example of one these this is the 18th 18 58 um these are cards and the child would get them either to work on at home or at school and um
They are the majority of the index in Peter Marzio's Bibliology.
Did I do the whole thing already?
Stencil boxes, trade and art school catalog, summer art school catalog.
You responded to that before.
Rockport, Obunque, Ipswich, Arthur Wesley Dow School.
um those things advertising trade cards you know that would have told you um you know buy your shoes at such and such a place or coats thread or soaping soap powder and the images often were images of artists at easels and that was again this class mobility and you be a fancier person buy soaping and
you'll be like an artist.
And the very important image content about artists, not ever explicitly said, but you can't miss it when you have a lot of them.
A number of those cards are introduced in Drunk Art.
So then there are wooden forms, you know, like cones and blocks.
and things that artists drew from.
And this, you know, this weird feeling I have as I go through this, I don't know where some of this stuff is, but there were, in the 1870s, with the drawing law, there was a boom in the making of educational art equipment.
And there were these beautiful little slaves.
I don't know where they are right now.
That behind you, Catherine and Bill, is the Chautauqua Arts Desk, which has a whole curriculum you roll, 1895.
It's just wonderful, and it's all the charm of modernity and inventions.
And where did you find that?
I picture, you know Jolly Jim's
It's really true that Jolly Tibbs and Wilbur used to go there, Nancy, right?
Now it's t-shirts and socks that they sell there, but they used to have... Was it like an antique?
They used to have an antique area.
They used to have it on the radio.
Yes, yes.
And then they alternated with a more upscale antique show in that same place, and I'm not sure which...
And then these are all coloring books behind you, Morten.
And then magazines on art.
I have a complete edition of School Arts magazine, and many, many very interesting magazines on craft and taste.
I was explaining to some of you who got here first something I feel very strongly about saying again, and that is that as much as I was a pack rat and had a vision to save all this stuff, there was someone who preceded me who was art director for the public schools of Gloucester who
saved everything that came into her house.
Crayon samples, paint samples, art instruction magazines, manuals, this school arts magazine, which is a fantastic 20th century resource.
She saved every issue.
And a student of mine led me to this collection, and I just bought out her apartment.
And as I'm getting ready, I mean her, this student's husband was a bookseller.
She attended MassArt in the class of 1902.
And her whole portfolio and materials and everything is, they are not going, I'm probably going to give that to MassArt.
But what was I going to say?
She had this sense of the object as document.
She just, I don't know, maybe I'm reading into her, but why was her house full of that stuff?
But it's all... Was it only that stuff?
And what?
Was it only that stuff?
No, she also collected a world wool on posters.
She had lots of aesthetics, but she clearly loved visual material.
And...
So she's my partner, isn't it?
She's long deceased.
I mean, not so long.
I bought it from her estate.
Did you know her?
No, I didn't know her.
I knew a young man who had studied with her and knew her and said how remarkable she was.
And I was going to interview him more, and my instinct was not to.
Can you tell us her name?
Mabel Spofford.
And she was a wonderful artist on her own night.
I mean, the whole thing... I don't want to get into this pontificating, but the level of general artistry was so much... You know, if you were trained, the level of teacher artistry, let's put it that way, or practicing amateurs, is mind-boggling to us today, who mostly have not had that training.
or who had the training I grew up in.
My niece was here when I was doing this little chat last week.
And it was so funny to be able to tell her this, which of course she wouldn't know.
But I grew up in a period when you were not supposed to look at any examples of art.
You were supposed to bring it from inside.
How do you do that?
I tried my best.
And my mother, who had been an art student at Cooper Union, was adamant about not copying and about expressivity and all that stuff, which was a very exciting thing to grow up with.
But the joke I was telling to my niece is, you know, Mother said, no, coloring books.
I got tons of them.
Anyway.
Are any of them colored in?
Yes.
And that's a great interest to me.
Many of the children's drawings are like, especially when they're very young children's drawings, they're very like what you'd say today.
You know, but we sort of clean all that up.
In fact, when I bought some people said, I'm going to do it, well, this isn't so good, it's got some crayon in it.
So, there are many interesting stories about buying this stuff.
I'll tell you the other end of it.
I mean, the coloring books I bought for Peanuts.
It started being so interesting, and then it got more and more interesting.
Yesterday, Andy and I were wandering around and hopped into this really pathetic flea market, and there was one drawing book called the Boy Scout Drawing Book, 19-something when the Boy Scouts were formed.
$50 for that drawing book now.
So it's a completely...
Well, does that encourage you now, because you see the high prices?
That must indicate that the interest is coming back.
Well, you get... I don't think it is... In that case, it's the Boy Scout-ness of the material, not the coloring book thing.
Good point.
There are many intersecting audiences for this, other than the...
the one that is my major focus.
How you doing?
Great.
I'm going to show you some, yeah.
But I want to show you this first because this is another lesson about buying.
This is also from Goodspeed.
Somebody was saying before asked about Goodspeed or where something came from.
I really miss that place.
But anyway, I used to go in there like a drunk and say, you got any other education stuff today?
And the guy who I was talking to, who I've seen many times, said, nope.
And he had this on his lap.
And he was cataloging.
Now, the reason that I make the point of this is that it's very hard to know what you have until you spend a lot of time looking at it.
I don't know what he thought this was, but this is from about 1800.
It's called Mariantha of Numberless Groups of Changeable Flowers.
It was printed in London, but it was clearly used here.
The girl who owned this was Mary Whitney, and it was a gift from Colonel Davis of Philadelphia.
And what this is, is a wonderful manual, very typical of English manuals.
But that was when I drew the line.
The British really valued these things.
And when I was in London, I saw these.
I saw how many and exquisite they are.
But this one I found here, so I figured it could have been used by a privileged young lady in this culture.
this is the very frequently done convention of having the color squares in the text all hand colored and then later on there are these plates of flower compositions the purpose of this art instruction manual was to teach you color harmony and color composition
and the way you did it that's one of the reasons this is one of my favorite things oh my is that you've got these flowers on little like popsicle sticks and you inserted them in these and this i'll show you first because it's not as magical as what's to come but here is what's coming
You see why I thought Shelley would be particularly interested in that.
And here, so there are three of these, and you were, they all have slipped to put these in, and then these are the flowers.
Oh, that's beautiful.
Isn't that wonderful?
This is a little painting.